---
title: FOL Inference
author: Johannes Korbmacher
locked: true
weight: 90
params: 
  date: 14/10/2024
  last_edited: 15/10/2024
  id: txt-finf
  math: true
---

# FOL Inference

Having discussed the syntactic and semantic framework of FOL in {{< chapter_ref
chapter="FOL" >}} Chapter 9. FOL{{< /chapter_ref >}}, we'll now turn to methods
for step-wise **inference** in FOL.

As you'll see, FOL inference packs a bit more of a punch than propositional
inference: not only are the rules more complicated, but we have to be careful
about how we apply them. The problem is that, because of **undecidability**, we
can run into "loops" and "infinite regresses". This problem is ultimately
unavoidable, but there are methods and techniques to mitigate its consequences.

In this chapter, we'll build on {{< chapter_ref chapter="proofs" >}} Section 7.
Logical proofs{{< /chapter_ref >}}, especially {{< chapter_ref chapter="proofs"
id="natural-deduction" >}} natural deduction {{< /chapter_ref >}}. So if you're
not completely clear on the ideas from that chapter, go back and have another
look.

## Natural Deduction 

Remember that **natural deduction** aims to mimic human-style step-by-step
reasoning. This makes it a good starting point for our exploration of FOL
inference.

The natural deduction system for FOL has four new rules in addition to the rules
for the propositional connectives, two for each of the quantifiers
$\forall,\exists$. 

Let's begin with the **universal quantifier** $\forall$. Here's a straight-forward
inference:

{{< img src="img/ex-ue.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

If everybody has a parent, then Ada does.

This inference is what lies behind the standard elimination rule for the
universal quantifier:

{{< img src="img/ue.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

Here $A(t)$ stands for the result of replacing the variable $x$ with the term
$t$ everywhere where $x$ is not "captured by" another quantifier:

+ Suppose $\forall xA(x)$ is $\forall x\exists y\mathsf{Parent}(x,y)$.

+ Then $A(x)$ is $\exists y\mathsf{Parent}(x,y)$.

+ If $t$ is $Ada$, then $A(t)$ is $\exists y\mathsf{Parent}(Ada,y)$.

+ **NB**: If $A(x)$ is 
  
  $$\exists y\mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\land \forall x\mathsf{Human}(x)$$ 

  and $t$ is Ada, then $A(t)$ is 

  $$\exists y\mathsf{Parent}(Ada,y)\land \forall x\mathsf{Human}(x)$$ 

  and _not_ 

  $$\exists y\mathsf{Parent}(Ada,y)\land \forall x\mathsf{Human}(Ada)$$

This rule is also called **universal instantiation**, it formalizes the
idea that if everything is so and so, then any thing you may pick is also so and
so.

There is a small **caveat**: We may not chose $t$ _completely_ freely in
$\forall E$. The thing is that $t$ may not contain a variable $x$, which would
be "captured" by another quantifier after. So, we may not, for example, infer: 

$$\exists y\mathsf{Parent}(y,y)$$ 

from 

$$\forall x\exists y \mathsf{Parent}(x,y).$$

We cannot infer from everyone having a parent that there's somebody who's their
own parent.

This may seem "obvious", but it's important to keep in mind. The term $t$ may be
a variable, but if may not be "captured" by another quantifier.

These kinds of side-conditions are _par for the course_ in FOL.

This tells us what we can infer _from_ a universally quantified claim, but from
what can we infer a universally quantified claim itself?

The idea in natural deduction and much of the following is that we can use _free
variables_ for that, which are variables that are not "captured" by any
quantifier. Take the statement:

$$\exists y\mathsf{Parent}(x,y)$$

In line with the reading of variables as pronouns, this says something like
[they](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singular_they) have a parent, without
specifying who "they" are. If we have established that _they_ have a parent
without having assumed anything else about who they are,  we've effectively
established for an arbitrary person that they have a parent. If we can show
something like this, then we may infer that _every_ person has a parent:

{{< img src="img/ex-ui.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

Expressed as a general inference rule, this becomes:

{{< img src="img/ui.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

Here the $\alpha$ stands for an arbitrary variable $x,y,z,\dots$ subject to the
following **extremely important** side-condition $\dagger$:

+ We may _only_ infer $\forall xA(x)$ from $A(\alpha)$ if the variable $\alpha$
is _really_ arbitrary. We ensure this by demanding that in no assumption, which
occurs in the derivation before $A(\alpha)$ we may have $\alpha$ occurring
unless its "captured" by a quantifier.

If we wouldn't have this condition, we'd be saying that the following inference
is valid:

$$\exists y\mathsf{Friend}(x,y)\vDash \forall x\exists y\mathsf{Friend}(x,y)$$

If _they_ have a friend, then _everybody_ has a friend. This is, of course, not
a good inference: just because some person has friends, doesn't mean everybody
does. 

The point is that we can only apply $\forall I$ if the variable doesn't depend
on anything else, so what would be OK, would be the following inference:

{{< img src="img/condition-ue-example.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

If everybody has a friend, then everybody either has a friend or is their own
enemy.

Let's turn to the **existential quantifier** $\exists$. As in the case of the
universal quantifier $\forall$, there is a straight-forward inference that
motivates our first inference rule. 

Consider the following inference:

{{< img src="img/ex-ei.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

If Ada is on the _Philosopher's Walk_, then _somebody_ is on the philosophers
walk.

If we abstract this to a general inference rule, we get:

{{< img src="img/ei.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

No side-conditions, not _ifs and buts_, that's it üòÉ

This inference rule allows us to "introduce" an existential quantifier. But what
can we infer _from_ one? 

The idea of natural deduction is to say that what follows from the claim that
someone has a property is that some person, we don't know who, has the property.
Here's how this work "in action":

{{< img src="img/ex-ee.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

We're just introducing a new constant $c$ for the person who's on the Walk. It's
important that this constant doesn't appear anywhere else in our derivation (or
background knowledge base) to avoid serious mistakes. 

For example, the following inference is (obviously) problematic:

{{< img src="img/condition-ee-example.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

From Ada not being on the Walk but _somebody_ being on the walk, we can't infer
that Ada is both on the walk and not.

The general rule, then, is the following:

{{< img src="img/ee.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

Here the side-condition $\ddagger$ says that the constant $c$ must be new to the
inference (and knowledge base or any other background facts).

In a more complex reasoning setting, we would apply this rule as follows:

{{< img src="img/full-example.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

By adding the 4 rules we've just discussed to the rules for propositional logic,
we obtain a proof system for FOL:

{{< img src="img/four-rules.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

This system works‚Ñ¢Ô∏è, in the sense that it is sound and complete (with the
definition from the {{< chapter_ref chapter="FOL" >}}previous chapter{{<
/chapter_ref >}}). 

Like any proof system for FOL, however, the systems is subject to
undecidability: there _cannot_ be _any_ algorithm that in finite time correctly
determines for arbitrary input inferences whether they're valid. 

This means, in particular, we can't algorithmically search for proofs from a
given premise set to a given conclusion and expect a yes/no answer (there is a
proof/there isn't a proof) after some finite time.

This is a **fundamental problem for automated FOL inference**, of course: any
inference engine will need to be _smart_ to be an effective reasoner, it can't
just brute force the problem. And even a smart algorithm may sometimes never
find the answer.

The mathematical proof of this fundamental fact about reasoning is out of reach
in this course, but we can illustrate _why_ this happens. In fact, showing this
is a great setup for the next [topic](#generalized-mp-and-unification):

Suppose that our premises contain a premise of the form:

$$\forall x\exists y\mathsf{BiggerThan}(x,y)$$

We want to know whether some conclusion follows from this. It doesn't really
matter what the potential conclusion is, since the problem already occurs if we
automatically draw inferences from $$\forall x\exists
y\mathsf{BiggerThan}(x,y)$$ in an unfortunate way.

Suppose we already have a constant in our knowledge base, say $0$ for the number
zero. A natural thing to do is to instantiate any universal quantifier we come
across with all the constants we know to see if we get the result. So, we infer
$$\exists y\mathsf{BiggerThan}(0,y)$$
So far so good. Now, we don't have any other constants, so we don't draw any
further inferences using $\forall E$. Since we've got nothing else we can do, we
try the rule $\exists E$ and introduce a new constant: $c_1$ (you'll see in a
second why there's an index):

$$\exists y\mathsf{BiggerThan}(0,c_1)$$

But wait, we've got a new constant, so we should infer:

$$\exists y\mathsf{BiggerThan}(c_1,y)$$

from

$$\forall x\exists y\mathsf{BiggerThan}(x,y)$$

Again, we've instantiated the $\forall$ with all our constants, so we try
$\exists E$ again. Since our constant must be new, we choose $c_2$. Ah, a new
constant, so we need to use $\forall E$ for our premise again, giving us:

$$\exists y\mathsf{BiggerThan}(c_1,c_2)$$

Now you quickly see that we're caught in a [infinite
loop](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infinite_loop). Every time we instantiate
the universal quantifier, the existential quantifier gives us a new constant to
instantiate the universal quantifier for. This procedure gives us a bunch of
proofs, but never the one we're looking for.

Of course, we could avoid hitting the infinite loop "immediately" by first
applying some other rules after we've introduced $c_1$. This would give us some
more inferences, which is good of course. The problem, however, is that we can
never _completely_ avoid infinite loops like this. That's the consequence of
undecidability.

The _moral_ of the story is that we need to be "smart" when we're instantiating
universal quantifiers: we need to instantiate them with the right terms and at
the right time‚Äìotherwise we might get "stuck" in an infinite loop.

Making smart choices in this context is the topic of the next section.

## Generalized MP and Unification

A standard setup we find ourselves in when it comes to automated FOL inference
is that we have a KB with a bunch of rules of the form:

$$\forall x\forall y\dots((P_1(x,y,\dots)\land P_2(x,y,\dots))\land \dots \to
C(x,y,\dots))$$

These are simple if-then rules (which correspond to [Horn
clauses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Horn_clause)).

Take, for example, the FOL version of the rules for our robot planning example:
$$\forall x\forall n((On(x, n) \land Switch(x, n)) \to Off(x, n + 1))$$
$$\forall x\forall n((Off(x, n) \land Switch(x, n)) \to On(x, n + 1))$$

A straight-forward inference strategy to extract information from these clauses
is to instantiate them and try to use _modus ponens_, effectively applying the
{{< chapter_ref chapter="conditionals" id="forward-chaining">}} forward
chaining{{< /chapter_ref >}}
{{< chapter_ref chapter="conditionals" id="backward-chaining">}} backward
chaining{{< /chapter_ref >}} techniques.

Suppose, for example, that we have the following information and want to know
what this determines:
$$On(L,1)$$
$$Switch(L,1)$$
We can then reason as follows (here in natural deduction):

{{< img src="img/gmp-example.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

In this way, in two steps using $\land I$ and $\forall E$, we can infer that the
left light will be off at time point $1+1=2$.

Once we recognize the pattern, we might want to be able to apply it directly as
in the following:

{{< img src="img/gmp-example-2.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

This can be achieved by adding the following **generalized MP** rule to our
calculus (with the justification of being able to derive it using $\land I$ and
$\forall E$):

{{< img src="img/gmp.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

Here $\vec{t}=t_1,t_2,\dots$ and $\vec{x}=x_1,x_2\dots$ are abbreviations.

The generalized MP rule puts the focus a key questions for efficient FOL
inference: choosing the right variables to instantiate universal quantifiers.

The point of inference pattern is to avoid unnecessary (but valid)
instantiations when trying to apply universal instantiation.


To see whether we can apply generalized MP, we need to find an instantiation for
the variables 

$$x_1,x_2,\dots$$

such that applying it to

$$P_1(x_1,x_2,\dots)\land P_2(x_1,x_2,\dots)\land\dots$$

gives us 

$$P_1(t_1,t_2,\dots)\land P_2(t_1,t_2,\dots)\land\dots$$

Here, it is clear what the answer is, viz:

$$x_1\mapsto t_1,x_2\mapsto t_2,\dots$$

But this example allows us to explain a key concept in FOL inference, which
underlies most FOL inference algorithm. This concept is known as **unification**.[^unification]

A unification procedure takes as input two formulas and gives as output a
substitution of terms that makes the two formulas identical.

So, for example, if the input are the two formulas:

$$On(L,1)\land Switch(L,1)\qquad \text{ and } \qquad On(x,y)\land Switch(x,y)$$

the unification procedure would give as output:

$$x\mapsto L, y\mapsto 1$$

since substituting $L$ for $x$ and $1$ for $y$ everywhere, will turn the second
input into the first.

Note that unification can be applied to two formulas where both need
substitutions. Take, for example, the following two formulas as input:

$$\mathsf{YoungerThan}(x,Ada)\qquad \text{ and }\mathsf{YoungerThan}(Alan,y)$$

If we replace $x$ with $Alan$ in the first input and $y$ with $Ada$ in the
second input, we obtain the unified clause

$$\mathsf{YoungerThan}(Alan,Ada)$$

Note also that there can be pairs of formulas that are **not unifiable**. Take,
for example, the formulas
$$\mathsf{OlderThan}(x,Alan)\qquad\mathsf{OlderThan}(Ada,x)$$
To unify the two formulas, we'd need to have both $x\mapsto Ada$ and $x\mapsto
Alan$, which is impossible.

We use the notation $A[x_1\mapsto t_1,x_2\mapsto t_2,\dots]$ to denote the
result of replacing $x_1$ with $t_1$, $x_2$ with $t_2$, and so forth everywhere
those variables aren't captured by quantifiers. This procedure is known
**substitution**. We call the rule $x_1\mapsto t_1,x_2\mapsto t_2,\dots$ _a_
substitution.

Using this notation, we can formulate the unification procedure as a procedure
that gives us for two formulas $A,B$ a substitution $$[A,B]\_{U}$$ such that
$$A[A,B]_{U}=B[A,B]\_{U}.$$

Using unification, we can write the generalized MP rule as follows:

{{< img src="img/gmp-u.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

Using generalized MP, one can develop FOL versions of forwards and backwards
chaining _directly_, side-stepping a search through all possible instantiations.

## FOL resolution

A main limitation of the generalized MP rule is that it works only with
universal conditions of the form we discussed above:

$$\forall x\forall y\dots((P_1(x,y,\dots)\land P_2(x,y,\dots))\land \dots \to
C(x,y,\dots))$$

While these are _very_ common in KBs, we often come across situations, where
we'd like to apply FOL inference to _arbitrary_ formulas.

A very effective and widely used technique for that is the generalization of the
**resolution method for FOL**.

Remember that the **resolution rule** says that if you have two clauses

$$l_1\lor l_2\lor \dots\lor p \qquad \qquad \neg p\lor k_1\lor k_2\lor\dots$$

you can infer: 

$$l_1\lor l_2\lor \dots k_1\lor k_2\lor\dots$$

In this rule $l_i,k_j$ are literals, meaning either propositional variables or
their negations. How can we generalize this rule to the FOL case?

First, note that literals correspond to basic facts in propositional logic:
$\mathsf{RAIN}$ is the basic fact that it rains, and $\neg\mathsf{RAIN}$ is the
basic fact that it doesn't. In fact, these basic facts directly correspond to
the basic _modeling_ facts $\nu(\mathsf{RAIN})=1$ and $\nu(\mathsf{RAIN})=0$.
What are the corresponding basic facts in FOL?

The straight-forward answer is that they are atomic formulas and their
negations, like:

$$\mathsf{OlderThan}(\mathsf{FatherOf}(Ada),Ada)\qquad \neg\mathsf{OlderThan}(\mathsf{FatherOf}(Ada),Ada)$$

Using these, we can, for example, formulate valid, resolution-style inferences
like the following:

{{< img src="img/example-resolution.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

If we have complex FOL formulas, which are just build up from atoms using
$\neg,\land,\lor,\to$, we can straight-forwardly generalize the propositional
procedure to the FOL case: simply re-write the formula in CNF (following the
procedure laid out in  {{< chapter_ref chapter="sat" id="normal-forms" >}}
chapter 5.3{{< /chapter_ref >}}), and we can apply the resolution rule.

For example, the above application of the resolution rule shows the validity of
the following FOL inference:

$$\mathsf{Parent}(\mathsf{FatherOf}(Ada),Ada)\to
\mathsf{OlderThan}(\mathsf{FatherOf}(Ada),Ada),$$
$$\mathsf{OlderThan}(\mathsf{FatherOf}(Ada),Ada)\to$$
$$\mathsf{Before}(\mathsf{BirthdayOf}(\mathsf{FatherOf}(Ada)),\mathsf{BirthdayOf}(Ada))\vDash$$
$$\mathsf{Parent}(\mathsf{FatherOf}(Ada),Ada)\to$$
$$\mathsf{Before}(\mathsf{BirthdayOf}(\mathsf{FatherOf}(Ada)),\mathsf{BirthdayOf}(Ada))$$

It turns out that universal quantifiers are relatively easy to handle using a
simple "trick". We simply treat "free" variables, that is variables which are
not captured by a corresponding quantifier, as _implicitly quantified_. To
illustrate, consider the following example.

We want to check the validity of the following inference:
$$\forall x\forall y(\mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\to \mathsf{OlderThan}(x,y)),$$
$$\forall x\forall y(\mathsf{OlderThan}(x,y)\to \mathsf{Before}(\mathsf{BirthdayOf}(x),\mathsf{BirthdayOf}(y)))\vDash$$
$$\forall x\forall y(\mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\to \mathsf{Before}(\mathsf{BirthdayOf}(x),\mathsf{BirthdayOf}(y)))$$
We do this with the following application of the resolution rule:

{{< img src="img/resolution-universal.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

Several things have happened here:
1. We've dropped all the universal quantifiers. Along the way, we made sure to
   rename all variables in such a way that every formula has unique variables.
2. We re-wrote the resulting quantifier free formulas in using the re-writing
   rules.
3. We applied the resolution rule using a substitution where $u\mapsto x$ and
   $v\mapsto y$. 
The first and third steps are the crucial things to focus on here: we allow a
resolution application with atoms $$\mathsf{OlderThan}(u,v)$$ and
$$\neg\mathsf{OlderThan}(x,y).$$ This is the way in which we treat the free
variables $x,y,u,v$ as "implicitly quantified". We think of them as being able
to assume different values, in particular $x$ and $u$ and $y$ and $v$ _can_
assume the same values, which makes this an ordinary case of resolution. 

But when doing so, we must respect the new assignment of variables. That is, we
apply the substitution $u\mapsto x,v\mapsto y$ to the entire formula, giving us
the conclusion.

Note that $[u\mapsto x,v\mapsto y]$ is a unification for the formulas
$\mathsf{OlderThan}(u,v)$ and $\neg\mathsf{OlderThan}(x,y).$ This gives us the
most general form of the **FOL resolution rule**:

$$l_1\lor l_2\lor \dots\lor m \qquad \qquad \neg n\lor k_1\lor k_2\lor\dots$$

you can infer: 

$$(l_1\lor l_2\lor \dots k_1\lor k_2\lor\dots)[m, n]_U$$

Assuming that $[m, n]_U$ does indeed exist.

This is the resolution rule we've applied in the inference:

{{< img src="img/resolution-universal.png" class="img-thumbnail mx-auto d-block my-4" >}}

To make this a general inference rule, we allow the $m,\neg m$ pair to occur
anywhere within $l_1\lor l_2\lor \dots\lor m, \neg n\lor k_1\lor k_2\lor\dots$
respectively (not only at the end/beginning).

It turns out that we can describe a general FOL inference procedure using
resolution. This involves FOL variant of the CNF from {{< chapter_ref
chapter="sat" id="normal-forms" >}} chapter 5.3{{< /chapter_ref >}}. 

We first describe the procedure. To transform an arbitrary formula into
**FO-CNF**:

1. Re-write all conditionals using the rule: $A\to B\leadsto \neg A\lor B$

2. Use the de Morgan rules to move all negations inwards, i.e. apply the rules:
   
   + $\neg\neg A\leadsto A$
   + $\neg(A\land B)\leadsto \neg A\lor\neg B$
   + $\neg(A\lor B)\leadsto \neg A\land\neg B$.

3. Use the quantifier negation rules to move negations inwards via the following rules: 
 
   + $\neg\forall xA\leadsto \exists x\neg A$
   + $\neg\exists xA\leadsto \forall x\neg A$

4. Re-name the variables such that each quantifier has its own variable, so
   that, e.g. $\forall xA\land \exists xB\leadsto \forall x_1A\land \forall
x_2B$.

5. For each quantifier, apply the following procedure known as **Skolemization**:[^skolemization]

    + Eliminate any existential quantifier from the formula and replace the variable it
    quantifiers over with a new function symbol $f_i(x_j,x_k,\dots)$, where: $x_i$
    is the variable the universal quantifier used and $x_j,x_k,\dots$ are all
    the universally quantified variables that come before $x_i$ in the formula. If no variables occur before use a fresh constant $c_i$.

    For example:

      +  $\forall x\exists y(P(x)\to R(x,y))$ becomes $\forall
      x(P(x)\to R(x,f(x)))$.
  
      + $\exists x(P(x)\to \forall yR(y,x))$ becomes $P(c)\to \forall yR(y,c)$.
  
      + $\forall x(\exists yR(x,y)\land \exists zP(x,z))$ becomes $\forall x(R(x,f(x))\land R(x,g(x))$.

6. Drop all the remaining universal quantifiers.

7. Apply the distribution law:

    + $A\lor (B\land C)\leadsto (A\lor B)\land (A\lor C)$

We apply all these steps recursively until we've got a formula in CNF. 

For example, here's what the procedure does to the formula $$\forall x\forall
y(\mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\to \neg \forall z (\mathsf{Parent}(z,y)\to x=z))$$

+ $\forall x\forall
y(\neg \mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\lor \neg\forall z(\neg \mathsf{Parent}(z,y)\lor x= z))$ (Re-write conditionals)

+ $\forall x\forall
y(\neg \mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\lor \exists z\neg (\mathsf{Parent}(z,y)\land x= z))$ 

+ $\forall x\forall
y(\neg \mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\lor \exists z\neg (\neg\mathsf{Parent}(z,y)\lor x= z))$ 

+ $\forall x\forall
y(\neg \mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\lor \exists z(\neg \neg\mathsf{Parent}(z,y)\land x\neq z))$ 

+ $\forall x\forall
y(\neg \mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\lor \exists z(\mathsf{Parent}(z,y)\land x\neq z))$ 

+ $\forall x\forall
y(\neg \mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\lor (\mathsf{Parent}(f(x,y),y)\land x\neq f(x,y)))$ 

+ $\neg \mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\lor (\mathsf{Parent}(f(x,y),y)\land x\neq f(x,y))$ 

+ $(\neg \mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\lor \mathsf{Parent}(f(x,y),y))\land (\neg \mathsf{Parent}(x,y)\lor x\neq f(x,y)))$ 

The CNF procedure always leads to a formula that is in CNF from the perspective
of propositional logic. Crucially, however, the formula is **not necessarily
equivalent** to the original formula in FOL. It is what's called
**equi-satisfiable**: the re-written formula is satisfiable (has a model) if and
only if the original formula has a model.

This is because of the **Skolemization** involved, but we won't go into the
mathematical details here. The crucial thing is that the procedure gives us a
formula, which is in CNF and doesn't involve quantifiers. For $A$ a formula, we
denote the result of applying the above procedure by $CNF(A)$.

Since the formula $CNF(A)$ is equi-satisfiable with the original formula $A$, we
can apply the resolution technique to determine the transformed formula's
satisfiability and infer the satisfiability status of the original formula.
This, it turns out, gives us a sound and complete inference system.

From here on out the ideas are actually just what we know from propositional
logic (compare {{< chapter_ref chapter="proofs" id="resolution-based-systems">}}
Chapter 7.2.3{{< /chapter_ref >}}):

+ To test an inference $$P_1,P_2,\dots\vDash C$$ for validity, we test whether the
formula $$P_1\land P_2\land \dots\land \neg C$$ is satisfiability. 

+ We do this by
applying the resolution rule as many times as possible to the clauses of
$$CNF(P_1\land P_2\land \dots\land \neg C).$$

+ If we can derive $\bot$, the inference is valid, if we cannot, the inference
is invalid.

The procedure we've just sketched leads to a very effective way of automated
reasoning, which provides the basis for many ATPs.

## Further readings

An excellent overview of FOL inference with more concrete discussion of the
implementations of forward and backward chaining in FOL can be found in [Russel and Norvig. 2021. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. 4th
Edition. Pearson](https://elibrary.pearson.de/book/99.150005/9781292401171),
chapter 9.


**Notes**

[^unification]: [Unification](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unification_(computer_science)) as a
general procedure can be used to solve equations of various kinds. Using it for
FOL formulas is just a special case.

[^skolemization]: This procedure is perhaps difficult to intuitively understand.
  
